We wondered which features of oscillating phosphosites direct their cell cycle-regulated phosphorylation. We tested whether they are either enriched or depleted in intrinsic disorder, which predicts phosphosites generally31. We first computationally analyzed intrinsic disorder in our entire dataset using the energy estimation-based predictor IUPred30. We then determined the number of phosphosites detected in predicted IDRs and compared it to the number of phosphosites expected according to the distribution of phosphorylatable residues (Figure 4a). Our identified phosphosites predominantly located to predicted IDRs, especially for proteins displaying dynamic regulation, with the highest enrichment in those undergoing oscillating phosphorylation (Figure 4b, c). Closer inspection of predicted CDK-substrates undergoing oscillating phosphorylation shows that they are phosphorylated almost exclusively in predicted IDRs (Figure 4d). 

At first sight, these data, and previous analyses of yeast in vitro CDK1 substrates6 or CDK1-dependent phosphosites28 which found enrichment in IDRs 28,29, suggest that CDKs control different steps in the cell cycle by generally mediating IDR phosphorylation. However, compositional bias might lead to false conclusions since sequence attributes of phosphorylation sites in general are similar to those found in IDRs31 – thus, CDK targets might be no different from other phosphosites. Furthermore, determining the probability of any site to be in an IDR requires an estimation of the disordered fraction of the proteome. We therefore analysed intrinsic disorder in the entire proteomes, and in previously identified CDK targets, of budding yeast, Xenopus and human, as well as our oscillating phosphosites in Xenopus. To test the robustness of our conclusions, we compared 10 different prediction methods. The fraction of disordered residues in the yeast proteome ranged between X and 38% depending on the prediction method (Supplementary Figure 6a, b). With one exception (DisEMBL-HL), all methods gave a lower fraction of disordered residues in the yeast proteome than in Xenopus and human  (Supplementary Table X), consistent with an increase in disorder in more complex organisms32. Serine, threonine, and proline are among the most enriched amino acids in predicted IDRs (Supplementary figure 6c), highlighting a possible evolutionary selection for phosphorylation sites in intrinsically disordered regions, as well as the danger in defining CDK sites as intrinsically disordered without correcting for compositional bias.

To define high-confidence CDK1 phosphosites in vivo, we first intersected yeast data obtained using chemical genetics to identify CDK1 substrates in vitro 3 or CDK1-dependent phosphosites in vivo 4.  This suggests that CDK1-mediated phosphorylation on sites other than S/TP may have been underestimated. All the methods predicted a significant enrichment of disordered residues among high confidence CDK1-mediated phosphosites (defined as the overlap between in vitro CDK1 substrates3 and CDK1-dependent phosphosites4) both when comparing to the entire proteome (Supplementary Figure 7b) or to non-CDK phosphosites (Figure 4e). CDK substrates had about twice the density of canonical and minimal CDK1 consensus motifs as non-CDK substrates (Supplementary Figure 7c). The results were similar when analysing the 436 curated human CDK1-family phosphosites from the Phosphosite database (ref), and for our experimentally-determined Xenopus oscillating sites on proteins that have homologues phosphorylated by CDKs in yeast or human (Figure 4e), suggesting conservation throughout eukaryotes.

As expected, ignoring compositional bias, minimal consensus motifs (S/TP) were significantly enriched in IDR even among phosphorylated proteins not identified as CDK1 substrates (Figure 4f), but the proteins with the highest density of motifs in predicted IDR were all CDK1 targets. If preferential CDK-mediated phosphorylation in IDR is simply attributable to the increased fraction of phosphorylatable amino acids in IDR, then the same should be true for CDK-independent phosphosites. To test this, we generated a contingency table of the ratio of CDK-dependent to CDK-independent phosphorylated serine and threonine residues in both ordered and disordered regions for each CDK target. We then computed a compound ratio for all CDK targets, which should be >1 if CDK phosphosites are preferentially located in IDR relative to other phosphosites. This was true for all IDR prediction methods in yeast, Xenopus and human


mail:

When I'm comparing "CDK targes" vs. "Non CDK targets" this last group of genes, in fact, are not the rest of the proteins in the entire proteome. They are proteins that get phosporylated in Ser and Thr also, but which phosphorylation doesn't decrease upon CDK inhibition. This is not trivial, because the conclusion it is not "CDK targets have more disorder than non-CDK targets" the conclusion would be "CDK targets(direct or indirect phosphorylation) have more disorder than targets for other kinases". Even if this is not very strong evidence, it's at least the first indication we have for the enrichment of phosphorylation in disorder being (more)specific for cell cycle phosphorylation.

Obvious findings like that, in data I've been working with for a while really makes me feel less comfortable with the idea of rushing the paper. I hope they reconsider the idea of giving it a couple more months of work. 

 Cheers,

Gero.



Correction:

We wondered which features of oscillating phosphosites direct their cell cycle-regulated phosphorylation. We tested whether they are either enriched or depleted in intrinsic disorder, which predicts phosphosites generally31. We first computationally analyzed intrinsic disorder in our entire dataset using the energy estimation-based predictor IUPred30. We then determined the number of phosphosites detected in predicted IDRs and compared it to the number of phosphosites expected according to the distribution of phosphorylatable residues (Figure 4a), taking into account the compositional bias of Ser and Thr towards disordered regions (Sup). Our identified phosphosites predominantly located to predicted IDRs, especially for proteins with at least one peptide displaying dynamic regulation of its phosphorylation, with the highest enrichment in those presenting peptides undergoing oscillating phosphorylation (Figure 4b, c).

At first sight, these data, and previous analyses of yeast in vitro CDK1 substrates6 or CDK1-dependent phosphosites28 which found enrichment in IDRs 28,29, suggest that CDKs control different steps in the cell cycle by generally mediating IDR phosphorylation. We sought to explore if the behavior of Cluster C and D corresponds to CDK1 subfamily targets in yeast and human. We then used the percentage of disordered residues as a "per-protein" measurement of the state of a protein, and we compared previously identified CDK targets, of budding yeast and human, as well as Cluster C and D versus the rest of their respective phosphoproteomes (Fig 4e). These results show for three different disorder prediction methods that for all the cases, CDK1 targets and the identified phosphosites from our study have a significant higher disordered amino acid fraction per protein. 

To test the robustness of our conclusions, we compared 10 different prediction methods. The fraction of disordered residues in the yeast proteome ranged between X and 38% depending on the prediction method (Supplementary Figure 6a, b). With one exception (DisEMBL-HL), all methods gave a lower fraction of disordered residues in the yeast proteome than in Xenopus and human  (Supplementary Table X), consistent with an increase in disorder in more complex organisms32.

To define high-confidence yeast CDK1 phosphosites in vivo, we first intersected data obtained using chemical genetics to identify CDK1 substrates in vitro 3 or CDK1-dependent phosphosites in vivo 4. We found that around half the CDK1 substrates defined in vitro were also phosphorylated in a CDK1-dependent manner in vivo, while half of the latter sites do not present a minimal CDK1 consensus motif (S/TP), including around 20% of the intersection between the datasets (Supplementary figure 7a).